## Go Go Gadget

bitly's stack isn't fancy. We use a combination of languages and tools that interact well with each
other and promote philosophies such as explicitness, simplicity, and robustness. Most of our
services are Python with many core components in C (of which some are open sourced under
[simplehttp][1]). We believe whole-heartedly in a services oriented approach where components do one
thing and do it well.

C is a fantastic language, one which I highly encourage *all* developers to learn and experiment
with as it pulls away the veil and provides insight into all the things that are happening behind
those seemingly innocent lines of a scripting language. With great power comes great responsibility
and sometimes that power comes at a cost – primarily in terms of development and debugging time and
thus the time it takes for you to ship your product.

Python has also treated us well. Its readability, standard library, and obviousness make it a great
language to work with on a team. It performs well and is flexible to the point where it can be used
successfully in most any situation – whether it be data science, network daemons, or one off shell
scripts.

### Enter Go

We identified early on that Go had all the makings of a language that could supersede some of the
places we would have traditionally turned to C *and* some of the places where we wanted to move away
from Python.

For example, we've built many network daemons in C that don't require strict, absolute, control over
memory. This is where Go shines. The "cost" of a garbage collected language in these types of
situations is overshadowed by the huge benefit to development time and flexibility. Code becomes
more readable as a natural side effect of being able to focus more on the "meat" of the problem
instead of having to worry about low level details. Mix in the "batteries included" standard library
and you're cookin'.

Also, all of our C apps are built on [libevent][2] - i.e. a single-threaded event loop with
callbacks that enables us to efficiently handle many thousands of simultaneous open connections. We
use the same technique in Python via [tornado][2a], but the amount of work a single Python process
can do is limited largely by runtime overhead. Additionally, this style of code can be hard to read
and debug when you're not used to it. Go's lightweight concurrency model allows you to write in an
imperative style while providing a built-in way to leverage the multi-core architecture of the
[computers][3] we operate on.

Just as in C, Go promotes a style of very explicit and localized error handling. While sometimes
verbose it forces a developer to *really* think about how their program might fail and what to do
about it. Unlike C, Go has the built-in capability of returning multiple values from a function,
resulting in clearer and more concise error-handling code.

The points above are mostly low-level. Go's true power comes from the fact that the
language is small and the standard library is large. We've had developers start from **zero**
experience with Go to writing working, production, code in a day. *That* is why we're so excited
about its place in our stack.

Think about it like this... if you can write something in Go just as fast as you could in Python
and:

 * gain the speed and robustness of a compiled, statically typed language without *all* of the rope
   to hang yourself
 * clearly express concurrent solutions to parallelizable problems
 * sacrifice little to nothing in terms of functionality
 * unambiguously produce consistently styled code (thank you `go fmt`)

What would you choose?

And in an effort to encourage the team to experiment and learn about Go we created the "Go Gopher
Award"! The most recent engineer to learn the language and get code into production gets to have the
[Go Gopher Squishable][4] sit with them at their desk. This is an *extremely* prestigious award.

### Go Isn't Perfect

Let's talk about garbage collection. It isn't *free*. Go's garbage collector is a conservative,
stop-the-world, mark-and-sweep GC. Practically speaking this means that the more careless you are in
what, how many, and how often you allocate the longer the world stops when the Go runtime cleans
things up. Unsurprisingly, significant performance gains can be had by being more careful... not
only in raw speed but in the consistency of it. Fortunately Go provides fantastic hooks ([pprof][5])
to introspect the runtime behavior of your application. It's generally obvious when your bottleneck
is the GC.

Interacting with JSON can be a bit clumsy. It's not *terrible*... just isn't as elegant and readable
as the alternative in Python. Truthfully it's quite impressive that it's as good as it is
considering the type safety of the language. We've made an effort to make this even easier and open
sourced [simplejson][6], a package that exposes a clean, chainable, API for interacting with JSON
where the format may not be known ahead of time.

Packaging has also given us some trouble. This is an area where we've probably gone the most
back-and-forth and are admittedly still in the early stages of finding what works for us. The
biggest problem is somewhat related to its purported greatest strength, i.e. qualifying the full
path when importing an open-source package. This has led to a whole crop of third-party utilities
that work around this by re-writing fully qualified import paths to something the user specifies
(and installing the package as the same, modified, name). We use [go-install-as][7] and our policy
is to install non-standard packages under our own custom import paths to ensure that our apps are
*always* compiled against the version and source we've strictly enforced to be installed on a
machine.

One notable feature missing from the HTTP client in Go's standard library is the ability to set
timeouts. It is further complicated by the inability of the API to provide easy access to the
connection (to do it yourself). We set out to bridge the gap and wrote [go-httpclient][6a] (with the
expectation that these features will eventually make it into the standard library).

Oh, and one night after way too much drinking they decided to use [a radical syntax][6b] for
formatting time as strings (instead of your standard `strftime` parameters). We open sourced 
[go-strftime][6c] to remedy that.

All in all these "issues" are minor and ultimately we felt that the benefits far outweigh the
tradeoffs – Go meets our needs and philosophies as software engineers.

### Go In Production

Where are we *actually* using Go in production? Let's take a step back and talk about how data moves
through our infrastructure first.

In the spirit of keeping things simple, fault tolerant, and asynchronous, most everything that gets
written to downstream systems is done so via message queues (formatted in JSON with all
communication over HTTP). Some of these message queues process volumes in the thousands per second.
We call the workers `queuereaders`, all of which were originally written in Python. At the lower
level are two C apps – [simplequeue][8], an HTTP interface to an in-memory data agnostic queue, and
[pubsub][9], an HTTP interface for one-to-many streaming.

As volume increases, the overhead of processing each message becomes more significant. Therefore,
these applications emerged as one key area where Go could replace Python. We started by re-writing
some queuereaders in Go by building matching libraries to support the same API we expose in Python.
Also, whereas in Python we would run multiple processes, in Go we leverage channels and goroutines
to write straightforward code that parallelizes HTTP requests to downstream systems or aggregates
writes to disk. These same features make it really easy to batch retrieve messages from the
queue while still processing them independently, reducing round-trips.

By experimenting with non-critical systems at the edge of our infrastructure we were able to safely
and methodically learn about Go's behavior in production. Needless to say, we've been very happy.
We've seen consistent, measurable performance gains without sacrificing stability.

We also wanted a bit more functionality out of the core combination of `simplequeue` and `pubsub`,
so we decided to build a successor with the goal of improving message delivery guarantees,
maintaining the spirit and simplicity of what we already had, increasing performance, solving some
configuration and setup issues, and providing a straightforward upgrade path.

We realized Go would be *perfect* for this project. We'll talk about it in depth in a future blog
post (and don't worry, it will be open source). Is it any good? Yes.

## EOL

Finally, we've also open sourced a few other Go related items...

 * [go-notify][10] - a package to standardize one-to-many communication over channels
 * [file2http][11] - a utility to spray a line-oriented file at an HTTP endpoint

As always, [bitly is hiring][12].

<div class="postmeta"> by <a href="http://twitter.com/imsnakes">snakes</a> (shoutouts to <a
href="http://twitter.com/jehiah">jehiah</a>, <a href="http://twitter.com/danielhfrank">dan</a>, <a
href="http://twitter.com/mccutchen">mccutch</a>, <a
href="http://twitter.com/mynameisfiber">micha</a>, and <a
href="http://twitter.com/ploxiln">pierce</a> for testing the Go waters with me – "if you're headed
down a rabbit hole, remember to bring a friend" &copy;)</div>

 [1]: https://github.com/bitly/simplehttp
 [2]: http://libevent.org
 [2a]: https://github.com/facebook/tornado
 [3]: http://twitter.com/jayridge
 [4]: http://www.googlestore.com/Fun/Go+Gopher+Squishable.axd
 [5]: http://golang.org/pkg/runtime/pprof/
 [6]: https://github.com/bitly/go-simplejson
 [6a]: https://github.com/mreiferson/go-httpclient
 [6b]: http://golang.org/src/pkg/time/format.go#L58
 [6c]: https://github.com/jehiah/go-strftime
 [7]: https://github.com/mreiferson/go-install-as
 [8]: https://github.com/bitly/simplehttp/blob/master/simplequeue/simplequeue.c
 [9]: https://github.com/bitly/simplehttp/blob/master/pubsub/pubsub.c
 [10]: https://github.com/bitly/go-notify
 [11]: https://github.com/bitly/file2http
 [12]: http://bitly.com/jobs
